A new generation of Israelites gathered before Moses as he gives his parting counsel.
And in the crowd is an older, seasoned spiritual man, Caleb.
Now Deuteronomy chapter 1 records what Moses recalls at that time.
He's talking about events that occurred some 40 years earlier when they were near the
promised land the first time.
What is Moses recall?
Verses 20 and 21, he reminds them the back then Jehovah gave the land to Israel, and they
were to take courage and take the land.
Do not be afraid.
Then what happened?
Well, let's start at verse 22.
However, all of you approached me and said, let us send men ahead of us to search out
the land for us and bring word back to us as to what root we should take and what kind
of cities will encounter.
The suggestions seemed good to me.
So I selected 12 of your men, one for each tribe.
They left and went up into the mountainous region and reached the valley of Eschol and
spied it out.
Of all the places that the spies saw, why does Moses recall Eschol some 40 years later?
What happened there?
What is Eschol?
Well, we got to go back to when the event occurred.
There's more information in Numbers chapter 13 and verse 20, Jehovah gave more instruction
to the spies.
He says, go, take courage and take some of the footage of the land.
And then it notes that it was the season of the first ripe grapes.
So in effect, Jehovah is saying, you can go and bring back grapes.
Now when the spies reach just north of Hebron, they see a valley of vineyards.
They call it Eschol.
It means cluster of grapes.
Vineyards in that region are still known for their high quality of grape today.
One cluster weighed in at 20 kilograms, that's 44 pounds.
So why does Jehovah tell them bring back grapes from Eschol?
It wasn't for the twelve spies.
They saw the land.
It was proof to all Israel that indeed Jehovah had given them this good land.
And Caleb, full of faith, knew that they could take the land then and there.
But in a lack of faith, ten spies disheartened the nation, casting the grapes aside as it
were.
They said, we're not going to go up.
Then Jehovah determines they'll spend forty years in the wilderness.
Now just think, what's Caleb thinking at this moment?
Forty-year-old Caleb now absorbing the news that his life has changed forever.
What he thought would be a short time into the promised land.
Now he's looking at the prime years of his life spent in the wilderness, not drinking
wine, eating more manna, raising his family there, growing old alongside his brothers who
were to blame for this sad turn of events.
What will help Caleb cope with this unwelcome change of assignment?
He hears Moses tell him two things, Deuteronomy 1, 31, the first thing he hears.
And you saw in the wilderness how Jehovah your God carried you, just as a man carries his
son.
What does Moses mean?
When was this?
Well, he said it at the time when they just finished a year or so in the wilderness, when
they left Egypt, and most of the time at Mount Sinai.
It was a momentous year.
They became a dedicated nation to Jehovah.
They got a new tabernacle, new law covenant, a new priesthood, now life centers around worship
of Jehovah.
In this way, Jehovah carried them spiritually through that year, not just physically.
So now Caleb has a choice.
How he spend the next 39 years, growing bitter in disappointment, just waiting out the time,
or would he let Jehovah carry him spiritually?
He wouldn't see many miracles in the years to come, like he did in the first year.
But he could read and meditate on God's law, and he would come to know Jehovah on a much
deeper level.
He would grow in love, grow in trust, grow in patience.
That was the first thing.
Jehovah can carry me spiritually.
Second thing, verse 35, none of Caleb's generation would enter the Promised Land, except for
a few, but here he hears his name in verse 36, except Caleb, the son of Jaffana, he will
see it, and I will give the land on which he walked to him and to his sons.
Now Caleb has a personal promise.
He will once again return to the vineyards, the grapes of Eschol, intended to benefit Israel,
now take on a new meaning for Caleb.
So how do you think he will recall his experience at Eschol over the years, a bitter, distant
memory?
Don't talk to me about Eschol.
Or would he recall that experience fondly, saying, not everything in my life has changed?
The grapes are still there, growing bountifully.
I saw them.
The land still flowing with milk and honey, Jehovah's promise still unchanged, and now more
personal to me than ever.
So what did these two things do for Caleb?
Well, let's look at the man after 40 years in the wilderness.
What do we see?
He's still grateful for the manna, not calling it contemptible, as others did.
He didn't become bitter over his brother's weaknesses as others had.
He didn't fall into immorality with the moorbite and the midnight women, as thousands did.
When Joshua, his contemporary, was appointed as Moses' successor, Caleb supported him whole
heartedly.
No envy.
And when they did enter the promised land, Caleb spent six more years helping his brothers
secure their inheritance first.
That is a spiritual man.
Caleb didn't just grow old in his assignment.
He grew in faith.
To the point where 85-year-old Caleb now takes on the toughest of assignments, fighting the
anachim in Hebron.
Yes, Hebron, he inherits the city and the mountainous regions surrounding it, could that involve
the very valley of Eschol?
If so, can you picture Caleb?
Once again, walking through the vineyards, a land on which he walked some 45 years earlier,
so grateful he let Jehovah carry him spiritually through his assignment.
You have a nice assignment.
The land to which you're going to is a very good land.
Bring the grapes of Eschol with you, fortify, stabilize the brothers and sisters.
But remember, when you face your trials, that's when you recall Eschol for yourself.
What will be your Eschol?
Well, that depends on the trial.
But you will recall Bible lessons you learned here that equal any trial that you face there.
For example, you may detect spiritual fatigue setting in and frustration.
You don't ignore that.
As much as Caleb would love a glass of wine from Eschol, what he needed was mana.
He didn't call it contemptible.
It sustained him daily.
You too, you appreciate the basic yet very necessary things.
You're not above them now.
The humble task of daily Bible reading and meditation.
The simple act of listening at a congregation meeting, looking for counsel, you need to
say strong.
And when tempted to do wrong, you recall that you add to your faith virtue, yes, virtue
that wholesome aspect where like Caleb and Phineas, you act quickly to kill any desire, tolerating
no rivalry in your heart.
And when you detect envy and contention growing, you recall that these traits are earthly
demonic, not the wisdom from above.
So you protect that different spirit and you choose the path that leads to peace and
unity instead.
Let your experience here not become a distant memory.
Recall Eschol with gratitude.
And you're not just recalling a happy feeling you had here in class.
Know you're walking through the valleys and vineyards of specific Bible accounts that
will fortify you.
And Jehovah carry you spiritually in your assignment, not just physically.
Keep his promise close to your heart.
And you will glorify Jehovah and bear much fruit in the land to which you're going as
you recall Eschol.